This is a brief description of how to install and use the Samba Web
Administration Tool on your machine.

Installation
------------

After you compile SWAT you need to run "make install" to install the
swat binary and the various help files and images. A default install
would put these in:

/usr/local/samba/bin/swat
/usr/local/samba/swat/images/*
/usr/local/samba/swat/help/*

Running via inetd
-----------------

You then need to edit your /etc/inetd.conf and /etc/services to enable
SWAT to be launched via inetd. 

In /etc/services you need to add a line like this:

swat            901/tcp

the choice of port number isn't really important except that it should
be less than 1024 and not currently used (using a number above 1024
presents an obscure security hole depending on the implementation
details of your inetd daemon).

In /etc/inetd.conf you should add a line like this:

swat    stream  tcp     nowait.400  root    /usr/local/samba/bin/swat swat

One you have edited /etc/services and /etc/inetd.conf you need to send
a HUP signal to inetd. On many systems "killall -1 inetd" will do this
on others you will need to use "kill -1 PID" where PID is the process
ID of the inetd daemon.



Launching
---------

To launch SWAT just run your favourite web browser and point it at
http://localhost:901/ 

Note that you can attach to SWAT from any IP connected machine but
connecting from a remote machine leaves your connection open to
password sniffing as passwords will be sent in the clear over the
wire.

You should be prompted for a username/password when you connect. You
will need to provide the username "root" and the correct root
password. 

Running
-------

Just follow your nose! If you can't work out how to use it then maybe
you should use "vi smb.conf" instead.


WARNINGS
--------

SWAT will rewrite your smb.conf file. It will rearrange the entries
and delete all comments, include= and copy= options. If you have a
carefully crafted smb.conf then back it up or don't use SWAT!


Development
-----------

Please join the samba-technical mailing list if you want to discuss
the development of SWAT. Note that this list is for technical developer
discussions and is not a general help list.

